CHAPTER XXXII.
HAD ELIZABETH'S OPINION BEEN ALL DRAWN FROM HER OWN FAMILY, SHE COULD NOT HAVE FORMED
A VERY PLEASING OPINION OF CONJUGAL FELLICITY OR DOMESTIC COMFORT.
HER FATHER, CAPTIVATED BY YOUTH AND BEAUTY, AND THAT APPEARANCE OF GOOD HUMOUR WHICH YOUTH
AND BEAUTY GENERALLY GIVE, HAD MARRIED A WOMAN WHOSE WEAK UNDERSTANDING AND ILIBERAL
MIND, HAD VERY EARLY IN THEIR MARRIAGE PUT AN END TO ALL REAL AFFECTION FOR HER.
RESPECT, ESTEEM, AND CONFIDENCE HAD VANISHED FOREVER, AND ALL HIS VIEWS OF DOMESTIC HAPPINESS
WERE OVER-THROWN.
BUT MR.
BENNETT WAS NOT OF A DISPOSITION TO SEEK COMFORT FOR THE DISAPPOINTMENT WHICH HIS OWN
IMPRUDENCE HAD BROUGHT ON IN ANY OF THOSE PLEASURES WHICH TOO OFTEN CONSOLLED THE UNFORTUNATE
FOR THEIR FOLLY OR THEIR VICE.
He was fond of the country and of books, and from these tastes had arisen his principal
enjoyments.
To his wife he was very little otherwise indebted, than as her ignorance and folly had contributed
to his amusement.
This is not the sort of happiness which a man would in general wish to owe to his wife,
but where other powers of entertainment are wanting, the true philosopher will derive
benefit from such as are given.
Elizabeth, however, had never been blind to the impropriety of her father's behavior
as a husband.
She had always seen it with pain, but respecting his abilities, and grateful for his affectionate
treatment of herself, she endeavoured to forget what she could not overlook, and to banish
from her thoughts that continual breach of conjugal obligation and decorum which, in
exposing his wife to the contempt of her own children, was so highly reprehensible.
But she had never felt so strongly as now the disadvantages which must attend the children
of so unsuitable a marriage, nor ever been so fully aware of the evils arising from so
ill-judged a direction of talents, talents which, rightly used, might at least have preserved
the respectability of his daughters, even if incapable of enlarging the mind of his
wife.
When Elizabeth had rejoiced over Wickham's departure, she found little other cause for
satisfaction in the loss of the regiment.
Their parties abroad were less varied than before, and at home she had a mother and sister
whose constant repinings at the dullness of everything around them threw a real gloom
over their domestic circle.
And, though Kitty might in time regain her natural degree of sense, since the disturbers
of her brain were removed, her other sister, from whose disposition greater evil might
be apprehended, was likely to be hardened in all her folly and assurance by a situation
of such double danger as a watering-place and a camp.
Upon the whole, therefore, she found, what has sometimes been found before, that an event
to which she had been looking with impatient desire did not, in taking place, bring all
the satisfaction she had promised herself.
It was consequently necessary to name some other period for the commencement of actual
felicity, to have some other point on which her wishes and hopes might be fixed, and by
again enjoying the pleasure of anticipation, console herself for the present, and prepare
for another disappointment.
Her tour to the lakes was now the object of her happiest thoughts.
It was her best consolation for all the uncomfortable hours which the discontentedness of her mother
and Kitty made inevitable.
And could she have included Jane in the scheme, every part of it would have been perfect.
But it is fortunate, thought she, that I have something to wish for.
Were the whole arrangement complete, my disappointment would be certain.
But here, by carrying with me one ceaseless source of regret in my sister's absence, I
may reasonably hope to have all my expectations of pleasure realized.
A scheme of which every part promises delight can never be successful, and general disappointment
is only warded off by the defence of some little peculiar vexation.
When Lydia went away she promised to write very often and very minutely to her mother
and Kitty, but her letters were always long expected, and always very short.
Those to her mother contained little else than that they were just returned from the
library, where such and such officers had attended them, and where she had seen such
beautiful ornaments as made her quite wild.
That she had a new gown, or a new parasol, which she would have described more fully,
but was obliged to leave off in a violent hurry, as Mrs. Forster called her, and they
were going off to the camp.
And from her correspondence with her sister there was still less to be learned, for her
letters to Kitty, though rather longer, were much too full of lines under the words to
be made public.
After the first fortnight, or three weeks of her absence, health, good humour, and cheerfulness
began to reappear at Longbourn.
Everything wore a happier aspect.
The families who had been in town for the winter came back again, and summer finery
and summer engagements arose.
Mrs. Bennet was restored to her usual quarrelous serenity, and by the middle of June Kitty
was so much recovered as to be able to enter Meryton without tears, an event of such happy
promise as to make Elizabeth hope that, by the following Christmas, she might be so tolerably
reasonable as not to mention an officer above once a day, unless, by some cruel and malicious
arrangement at the war-office, another regiment should be quartered in Meryton.
The time fixed for the beginning of their northern tour was now fast approaching, and
the fortnight only was wanting of it, when a letter arrived from Mrs. Gardiner, which
at once delayed its commencement and curtailed its extent.
Mr. Gardiner would be prevented by business from setting out till a fortnight later in
July, and must be in London again within a month.
And as that left too short a period for them to go so far and see so much as they had proposed,
or at least to see it with the leisure and comfort they had built on, they were obliged
to give up the lakes and substitute a more contracted tour, and, according to the present
plan, were to go no farther northwards than Derbyshire.
In that county there was enough to be seen to occupy the chief of their three weeks,
and to Mrs. Gardiner it had a peculiarly strong attraction.
The town where she had formerly passed some years of her life, and where they were now
spend a few days, was probably as great an object of her curiosity as all the celebrated
beauties of Matlock, Chatsworth, Dovedale, or the Peak.
Elizabeth was excessively disappointed.
She had set her heart on seeing the lakes, and still thought there might have been time
enough.
But it was her business to be satisfied, and certainly her temper to be happy, and all
was soon right again.
With the mention of Derbyshire there were many ideas connected.
It was impossible for her to see the word without thinking of Pemberley and its owner.
But surely, said she, I may enter his county without impunity, and rob it of a few petrified
spars without his perceiving me.
The period of expectation was now doubled.
Four weeks were to pass away before her uncle and aunt's arrival.
But they did pass away, and Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner, with their four children, did at length appear
at Longbourn.
The children, two girls of six and eight years old, and two younger boys, were to be left
under the particular care of their cousin Jane, who was the general favourite, and whose
steady sense and sweetness of temper exactly adapted her for attending to them in every
way, teaching them, playing with them, and loving them.
The gardeners stayed only one night at Longbourn, and set off the next morning with Elizabeth
in pursuit of novelty and amusement.
One enjoyment was certain, that of suitableness of companions, a suitableness which comprehended
health and temper to bear inconveniences, cheerfulness to enhance every pleasure, and
affection and intelligence which might supply it among themselves if there were disappointments
abroad.
It is not the object of this work to give a description of Derbyshire, nor of any of
the remarkable places through which their route thither lay.
Oxford, Plenham, Warwick, Camelworth, Birmingham, etc., are sufficiently known.
A small part of Derbyshire is all the present concern.
To the little town of Lambton, the scene of Mrs. Gardiner's former residence, and where
she had lately learned some acquaintance still remained, they bent their steps.
After having seen all the principal wonders of the country, and within five miles of Lambton,
Elizabeth found from her aunt that Pemberley was situated.
It was not in their direct road, nor more than a mile or two out of it.
In talking over their route the evening before, Mrs. Gardiner expressed an inclination to
see the place again.
Mr. Gardiner declared his willingness, and Elizabeth was applied to for her approbation.
"'My love, should you not like to see a place of which you have heard so much?' said her
aunt.
"'A place, too, with which so many of your acquaintances are connected.
Wickham passed all his youth there, you know?'
Elizabeth was distressed.
She felt that she had no business at Pemberley, and was obliged to assume a disinclination
for seeing it.
She must own that she was tired of seeing great houses.
After going over so many, she really had no pleasure in fine carpets or satin curtains.
Mrs. Gardiner abused her stupidity.
"'If it were merely a fine house richly furnished,' said she, "'I should not care about it myself,
but the grounds are delightful.
They have some of the finest woods in the country.'
Elizabeth said no more, but her mind could not acquiesce.
The possibility of meeting Mr. Darcy while viewing the place instantly occurred.
It would be dreadful.
She blushed at the very idea, and thought it would be better to speak openly to her
aunt than to run such a risk.
But against this there were objections, and she finally resolved that it could be the
last resource, if her private inquiries to the absence of the family were unfavourably
answered.
Accordingly, when she retired at night, she asked the chambermaid whether Pemberley were
not a very fine place, what was the name of its proprietor, and, with no little alarm,
whether the family were down for the summer.
A most welcome negative followed the last question, and her alarms now being removed,
she was at leisure to feel a great deal of curiosity to see the house herself.
And when the subject was revived the next morning, and she was again applied to, could
readily answer, and with a proper air of indifference, that she had not really any dislike to the
scheme.
To Pemberley, therefore, they were to go.
Elizabeth, as they drove along, watched for the first appearance of Pemberley woods with
some perturbation, and when at length they turned in at the lodge, her spirits were in
a high flutter.
The park was very large, and contained great variety of ground.
They entered it in one of its lowest points, and drove for some time through a beautiful
wood stretching over a wide extent.
Elizabeth's mind was too full for conversation, but she saw and admired every remarkable spot
and point of view.
They gradually ascended for half a mile, and then found themselves at the top of a considerable
eminence, where the wood ceased, and the eye was instantly caught by Pemberley house, situated
on the opposite side of a valley, into which the road, with some abruptness, wound.
Elizabeth.
It was a large, handsome stone building, standing well on rising ground, and backed by a ridge
of high woody hills.
And in front, a stream of some natural importance was swelled into greater, but without any
artificial appearance.
Its banks were neither formal nor falsely adorned.
Elizabeth was delighted.
She had never seen a place for which nature had done more, or where natural beauty had
been so little counteracted by an awkward taste.
They were all of them warm in their admiration, and at that moment she felt that to be mistress
of Pemberley might be something.
They descended the hill, crossed the bridge, and drove to the door, and, while examining
the nearer aspect of the house, all her apprehension of meeting its owner returned.
She dreaded lest the chambermaid had been mistaken.
On applying to see the place they were admitted into the hall, and Elizabeth, as they waited
for the housekeeper, had leisure to wonder at her being where she was.
The housekeeper came, a respectable-looking elderly woman, much less fine and more civil
than she had any notion of finding her.
They followed her into the dining-parlor.
It was a large, well-proportioned room, handsomely fitted up.
Elizabeth, after slightly surveying it, went to a window to enjoy its prospect.
The hill, crowned with wood, which they had descended, receiving increased abruptness
from the distance, was a beautiful object.
Every disposition of the ground was good, and she looked on the whole scene—the river,
the trees scattered on its banks, and the winding of the valley, as far as she could
trace it, with delight.
As they passed into other rooms, these objects were taking different positions, but from
every window there were beauties to be seen.
The rooms were lofty and handsome, and their furniture suitable to the fortune of its proprietor,
but Elizabeth saw, with admiration of his taste, that it was neither gaudy nor uselessly
fine, with less of splendour and more real elegance than the furniture of Rosings.
And of this place, thought she, I might have been mistress.
With these rooms I might now have been familiarly acquainted.
Instead of viewing them as a stranger, I might have rejoiced in them as my own, and welcomed
to them as visitors, my uncle and aunt.
But no—recollecting herself—that could never be.
My uncle and aunt would have been lost to me.
I should not have been allowed to invite them.
This was a lucky recollection.
It saved her from something very like regret.
She longed to inquire of the housekeeper whether her master was really absent, but had not
the courage for it.
At length, however, the question was asked by her uncle, and she turned away with alarm,
while Mrs. Reynolds replied that he was, adding,
But we expect him to-morrow, with a large party of friends.
How rejoiced was Elizabeth that their own journey had not by any circumstance been delayed
a day!
Her aunt now called her to look at a picture.
She approached and saw the likeness of Mr. Wickham, suspended, amongst several other
miniatures over the mantelpiece.
Her aunt asked her, smilingly, how she liked it.
The housekeeper came forward and told them it was a picture of a young gentleman, the
son of her late master's steward, who had been brought up by him at his own expense.
He has now gone into the army, she added.
But I am afraid he has turned out very wild.
Mrs. Gardiner looked at her niece with a smile, but Elizabeth could not return it.
And that, said Mrs. Reynolds, pointing to another of the miniatures, is my master, and
very like him.
It was drawn at the same time as the other, about eight years ago.
I have heard much of your master's fine person, said Mrs. Gardiner, looking at the picture.
It is a handsome face, but, Lizzy, you can tell us whether it is like or not.
Mrs. Reynolds' respect for Elizabeth seemed to increase on this intimation of her knowing
her master.
Does that young lady know Mr. Darcy?
Elizabeth coloured and said, A little.
And do you not think him a very handsome gentleman, ma'am?
Yes, very handsome.
I am sure I know none so handsome, but in the gallery upstairs you will see a finer,
larger picture of him than this.
This room was my late master's favourite room, and these miniatures are just as they used
to be then.
He was very fond of them.
This accounted to Elizabeth for Mr. Wickham's being among them.
Mrs. Reynolds then directed their attention to one of Miss Darcy, drawn when she was only
eight years old.
And is Miss Darcy as handsome as her brother, said Mrs. Gardiner?
Oh, yes, the handsomest young lady that ever was seen, and so accomplished.
She plays and sings all day long.
In the next room is a new instrument just come down for her, a present from my master.
She comes here to morrow with him.
Mr. Gardiner, whose manners were very easy and pleasant, encouraged her communicativeness
by his questions and remarks.
Mrs. Reynolds, either by pride or attachment, had evidently great pleasure in talking of
her master and his sister.
Is your master much at Pemberley in the course of the year?
Not so much as I could wish, sir, but I dare say he may spend half his time here, and Miss
Darcy is always down for the summer months.
Except, thought Elizabeth, when she goes to Ramsgate.
If your master would marry, you might see more of him.
Yes, sir, but I do not know when that will be.
I do not know who is good enough for him.
Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner smiled.
Elizabeth could not help saying,
It is very much to his credit, I am sure, that you should think so.
I say no more than the truth, and everybody will say that knows him, replied the other.
Elizabeth thought this was going pretty far, and she listened with increasing astonishment,
as the housekeeper added,
I have never known a crossword from him in my life, and I have known him ever since he
was four years old.
This was praise of all others most extraordinary, most opposite to her ideas.
That he was not a good-tempered man had been her firmest opinion.
Her keenest attention was awakened.
She longed to hear more, and was grateful to her uncle for saying,
There are very few people of whom so much can be said.
You are lucky in having such a master.
Yes, sir, I know I am.
If I were to go through the world I could not meet with a better, but I have always
observed that they who are good-natured when children are good-natured when they grow up,
and he was always the sweetest-tempered, most generous-hearted boy in the world.
Elizabeth almost stared at her.
Can this be Mr. Darcy? thought she.
His father was an excellent man, said Mrs. Gardiner.
Yes, ma'am, that he was indeed, and his son will be just like him, just as affable to
the poor.
Elizabeth listened, wondered, doubted, and was impatient for more.
Mrs. Reynolds could interest her on no other point.
She related the subjects of the pictures, the dimensions of the rooms, and the price
of the furniture in vain.
Mr. Gardiner, highly amused by the kind of family prejudice to which she attributed her
excessive commendation of her master, soon led again to the subject, and she dwelt with
energy on his many merits as they proceeded together up the great staircase.
He is the best landlord and the best master, said she, that ever lived, not like the wild
young men nowadays who think of nothing but themselves.
There is not one of his tenants or servants but will give him a good name.
Some people call him proud, but I am sure I never saw any thing of it.
To my fancy it is only because he does not rattle away like other young men.
In what an amiable light does this place him, thought Elizabeth.
This fine account of him, whispered her aunt as they walked, is not quite consistent with
his behaviour to our poor friend.
Perhaps we might be deceived.
That is not very likely.
Our authority was too good.
On reaching the spacious lobby above they were shown into a very pretty sitting-room,
lately fitted up with greater elegance and lightness than the apartments below, and were
informed that it was but just done to give pleasure to Miss Darcy, who had taken a liking
to the room when last at Pemberley.
He is certainly a good brother, said Elizabeth, as she walked towards one of the windows.
Mrs. Reynolds anticipated Miss Darcy's delight when she should enter the room.
And this is always the way with him, she added.
Whatever can give his sister any pleasure is sure to be done in a moment.
There is nothing he would not do for her.
The picture gallery and two or three of the principal bedrooms were all that remained
to be shown.
In the former were many good paintings, but Elizabeth knew nothing of the art, and from
such as had been already visible below she had willingly turned to look at some drawings
of Miss Darcy's in crayons, whose subjects were usually more interesting and also more
intelligible.
In the gallery there were many family portraits, but they could have little to fix the attention
of a stranger.
Elizabeth walked in quest of the only face whose features would be known to her.
At last it arrested her, and she beheld a striking resemblance to Mr. Darcy, with such
a smile over the face as she remembered to have sometimes seen when he looked at her.
She stood several minutes before the picture, in earnest contemplation, and returned to
it again before they quitted the gallery.
Mrs. Reynolds informed them that it had been taken in his father's lifetime.
There was certainly at this moment in Elizabeth's mind a more gentle sensation towards the original
than she had ever felt at the height of their acquaintance.
The commendation bestowed on him by Mrs. Reynolds was of no trifling nature.
What praise is more valuable than the praise of an intelligent servant?
As a brother, a landlord, a master, she considered how many people's happiness were in his guardianship.
How much of pleasure and pain was it in his power to bestow?
How much of good or evil must be done by him?
Every idea that had been brought forward by the housekeeper was favourable to his character,
and as she stood before the canvas on which he was represented, and fixed his eyes upon
herself, she thought of his regard with a deeper sentiment of gratitude than it had
ever raised before.
She remembered its warmth, and softened its impropriety of expression.
When all of the house that was open to general inspection had been seen, they returned downstairs,
and, taking leave of the housekeeper, were consigned over to the gardener, who met them
at the hall door.
As they walked across the hall towards the river, Elizabeth turned back to look again.
Her uncle and aunt stopped also, and while the former was conjecturing as to the date
of the building, the owner of it himself suddenly came forward from the road which led behind
it to the stables.
They were within twenty yards of each other, and so abrupt was his appearance that it was
impossible to avoid his sight.
Their eyes instantly met, and the cheeks of both were overspread with the deepest blush.
He absolutely started, and for a moment seemed immovable from surprise, but shortly recovering
himself, advanced towards the party, and spoke to Elizabeth, if not in terms of perfect composure,
at least of perfect civility.
She had instinctively turned away, but stopping on his approach, received his compliments
with an embarrassment impossible to be overcome.
Had his first appearance, or his resemblance to the picture they had just been examining,
been insufficient to assure the other two that they now saw Mr. Darcy, the gardener's
expression of surprise on beholding his master must immediately have told it.
They stood a little aloof while he was talking to their niece, who, astonished and confused,
scarcely dared lift her eyes to his face, and knew not what answer she returned to his
civil inquiries after her family.
Amazed at the alteration of his manner since they last parted, every sentence that he uttered
was increasing her embarrassment, and every idea of the impropriety of her being found
there recurring to her mind, the few minutes in which they continued were some of the most
uncomfortable in her life.
Nor did he seem much more at ease.
When he spoke, his accent had none of its usual sedateness, and he repeated his inquiries
as to the time of her having left Longbourn, and of her having stayed in Derbyshire so
often, and in so hurried a way, as plainly spoke the distraction of his thoughts.
At length every idea seemed to fail him, and, after standing a few moments without saying
a word, he suddenly recollected himself and took leave.
The others then joined her, and expressed admiration of his figure, but Elizabeth heard
not a word, and, wholly engrossed by her own feelings, followed them in silence.
She was overpowered by shame and vexation.
Her coming there was the most unfortunate, the most ill-judged thing in the world.
How strange it must appear to him!
In what a disgraceful light might it not strike so vain a man?
It might seem as if she had purposely thrown herself in his way again.
Oh, why did she come?
Or why did he thus come a day before he was expected?
Had they been only ten minutes sooner, they should have been beyond the reach of his discrimination,
for it was plain that he was that moment arrived, that moment alighted from his horse or his
carriage.
She blushed again and again over the perverseness of the meeting.
And his behaviour so strikingly altered, what could it mean?
That he should even speak to her was amazing, but to speak with such civility, to inquire
after her family.
Never in her life had she seen his manners so little dignified, never had he spoken with
such gentleness as on this unexpected meeting.
What a contrast did it offer to his last address in Rosings Park, when he put his letter into
her hand!
She knew not what to think, or how to account for it.
They had now entered a beautiful walk by the side of the water, and every step was bringing
forward a nobler fall of ground, or a finer reach of the woods to which they were approaching.
But it was some time before Elizabeth was sensible of any of it, and, though she answered
mechanically to the repeated appeals of her uncle and aunt, and seemed to direct her eyes
to such objects as they pointed out, she distinguished no part of the scene.
Her thoughts were all fixed on that one spot of Pemberley House, whichever it might be,
where Mr. Darcy then was.
She longed to know what at the moment was passing in his mind, in what manner he thought
of her, and whether, in defiance of every thing, she was still dear to him.
Perhaps he had been civil only because he felt himself at ease.
Yet there had been that in his voice which was not like ease.
Whether he had felt more of pain or of pleasure in seeing her, she could not tell.
But he certainly had not seen her with composure.
At length, however, the remarks of her companions on her absence of mind aroused her, and she
felt the necessity of appearing more like herself.
They entered the woods, and bidding adieu to the river for a while, ascended some of
the higher grounds, when, in spots where the opening of the trees gave the eye power to
wander, were many charming views of the valley, the opposite hills, with the long range of
woods overspreading many, and occasionally part of the stream.
Mr. Gardiner expressed a wish of going round the whole park, but feared it might be beyond
a walk.
With a triumphant smile they were told that it was ten miles round.
It settled the matter, and they pursued the accustomed circuit, which brought them again,
after some time, in a descent among hanging woods to the edge of the water, and one of
its narrowest parts.
They crossed it by a simple bridge, in character with the general air of the scene.
It was a spot less adorned than any they had yet visited, and the valley, here contracted
into a glen, allowed room only for the stream, and a narrow walk amidst the rough coppice-wood
which bordered it.
Elizabeth longed to explore its windings, but when they had crossed the bridge, and
their distance from the house, Mrs. Gardiner, who was not a great walker, could go no farther,
and thought only of returning to the carriage as quickly as possible.
Her niece was, therefore, obliged to submit, and they took their way towards the house
on the opposite side of the river, in the nearest direction, but their progress was
slow, for Mr. Gardiner, though seldom able to indulge the taste, was very fond of fishing,
and was so much engaged in watching the occasional appearance of some trout in the water, and
talking to the man about them, that he advanced but little.
Whilst wandering on in this slow manner, they were again surprised, and Elizabeth's astonishment
was quite equal to what it had been at first, by the sight of Mr. Darcy approaching them,
and at no great distance.
The walk here being less sheltered than on the other side, allowed them to see him before
they met.
Elizabeth, however astonished, was at least more prepared for an interview than before,
and resolved to appear, and to speak with calmness, if he really intended to meet them.
For a few moments, indeed, she felt that he would probably strike into some other path.
The idea lasted, while a turning in the walk concealed him from their view.
The turning passed, he was immediately before them.
With a glance, she saw that he had lost none of his recent civility, and, to imitate his
politeness, she began, as they met, to admire the beauty of the place.
But she had not got beyond the words, delightful, and charming, when some unlucky recollections
obtruded, and she fancied that praise of Pemberley from her might be mischievously construed.
Her colour changed, and she said no more.
Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind, and, on her pausing, he asked her if she would
do him the honour of introducing him to her friends.
This was a stroke of civility for which she was quite unprepared, and she could hardly
suppress a smile at his being now seeking the acquaintance of some of those very people
against whom his pride had revolted in his offer to herself.
What will be his surprise, thought she, when he knows who they are?
He takes them now for people of fashion.
The introduction, however, was immediately made, and, as she named their relationship
to herself, she stole a sly look at him, to see how he bore it, and was not without the
expectation of his decamping as fast as he could from such disgraceful companions.
That he was surprised by the connexion was evident.
He sustained it, however, with fortitude, and, so far from going away, turned back with
them, and entered into conversation with Mr. Gardiner.
Elizabeth could not but be pleased, could not but triumph.
It was consoling that he should know she had some relations for whom there was no need
to blush.
She listened most attentively to all that passed between them, and gloried in every
expression every sentence of her uncle which marked his intelligence, his taste, or his
good manners.
The conversation soon turned upon fishing, and she heard Mr. Darcy invite him, with the
greatest civility, to fish there as often as he chose, while he continued in the neighbourhood,
offering at the same time to supply him with fishing tackle, and pointing out those parts
of the stream where there was usually most sport.
Mrs. Gardiner, who was walking arm in arm with Elizabeth, gave her a look expressive
of wonder.
Elizabeth said nothing, but it gratified her exceedingly.
The compliment must be all for herself.
Her astonishment, however, was extreme, and continually was she repeating,
Why is he so altered?
From what can it proceed?
It cannot be for me.
It cannot be for my sake that his manners are thus softened.
My reproofs at Hunsford could not work such a change as this.
It is impossible that he should still love me.
After walking some time in this way, the two ladies in front, the two gentlemen behind,
On resuming their places, after descending to the brink of the river for the better inspection
of some curious water plant, there chanced to be a little alteration.
It originated in Mrs. Gardiner, who, fatigued by the exercise of the morning, found Elizabeth's
arm inadequate to her support, and consequently preferred her husband's.
Mr. Darcy took her place by her niece, and they walked on together.
After a short silence the lady first spoke.
She wished him to know that she had been assured of his absence before she came to the place,
and accordingly began by observing that his arrival had been very unexpected.
For your housekeeper, she added, informed us that you would certainly not be here till
to-morrow, and, indeed, before we left Bakewell we understood that you were not immediately
expected in the country.
He acknowledged the truth of it all, and said that business with his steward had occasioned
his coming forward a few hours before the rest of the party with whom he had been travelling.
They will join me early to-morrow, he continued, and among them are some who will claim an
acquaintance with you, Mr. Bingley and his sisters.
Elizabeth answered only by a slight bow.
Her thoughts were instantly driven back to the time when Mr. Bingley's name had been
the last mentioned between them, and, if she might judge by his complexion, his mind
was not very differently engaged.
There is also one other person in the party, he continued after a pause, who more particularly
wishes to be known to you.
Will you allow me, or do I ask too much, to introduce my sister to your acquaintance during
your stay at Lambton?
The surprise of such an application was great indeed.
It was too great for her to know in what manner she acceded to it.
She immediately felt that whatever desire Miss Darcy might have of being acquainted
with her must be the work of her brother, and without looking farther it was satisfactory.
It was gratifying to know that his resentment had not made him think really ill of her.
They now walked on in silence, each of them deep in thought.
Elizabeth was not comfortable.
That was impossible, but she was flattered and pleased.
His wish of introducing his sister to her was a compliment of the highest kind.
They soon outstripped the others, and when they had reached the carriage Mr. and Mrs.
Gardiner were half a quarter of a mile behind.
He then asked her to walk into the house, but she declared herself not tired, and they
stood together on the lawn.
At such a time much might have been said, and silence was very awkward.
She wanted to talk, but there seemed to be an embargo on every subject.
At last she recollected that she had been travelling, and they talked of Matlock and
Dovedale with great perseverance.
Yet time and her aunt moved slowly, and her patience and her ideas were nearly worn out
before the tete-a-tete was over.
On Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner's coming up they were all pressed to go into the house and
take some refreshment, but this was declined, and they parted on each side with utmost politeness.
Mr. Darcy handed the ladies into the carriage, and when it drove off Elizabeth saw him walking
slowly towards the house.
The observations of her uncle and aunt now began, and each of them pronounced him to
be infinitely superior to anything they had expected.
He is perfectly well behaved, polite, and unassuming, said her uncle.
There is something a little stately in him to be sure, replied her aunt, but it is confined
to his air, and is not unbecoming.
I can now say with the housekeeper that, though some people may call him proud, I have seen
nothing of it.
I was never more surprised than by his behaviour to us.
It was more than civil, it was really attentive, and there was no necessity for such attention.
His acquaintance with Elizabeth was very trifling.
To be sure, Lizzy, said her aunt, he is not so handsome as Wickham, or rather, he has
not Wickham's countenance, for his features are perfectly good.
But how came you to tell me that he was so disagreeable?
Elizabeth excused herself as well as she could, said that she had liked him better
when they had met in Kent than before, and that she had never seen him so pleasant as
this morning.
But perhaps he may be a little whimsical in his civilities, replied her uncle.
Your great men often are, and therefore I shall not take him at his word, as he might
change his mind another day and warn me off his grounds.
Elizabeth felt that they had entirely misunderstood his character, but said nothing.
"'From what we have seen of him,' continued Mrs. Gardiner, "'I really should not have
thought that he could have behaved in so cruel a way by anybody as he has done by poor Wickham.
He has not an ill-natured look.
On the contrary, there is something pleasing about his mouth when he speaks.
And there is something of dignity in his countenance that would not give one an unfavourable idea
of his heart.
But to be sure, the good lady who showed us his house did give him a most flaming character.
I could hardly help laughing aloud sometimes.
But he is a liberal master, I suppose, and that, in the eye of a servant, comprehends
every virtue.'
Elizabeth here felt herself called on to say something in vindication of his behaviour
to Wickham, and therefore gave them to understand, in as guarded a manner as she could, that
by what she had heard from his relations in Kent, his actions were capable of a very different
construction, and that his character was by no means so faulty nor Wickham's so amiable
as they had been considered in Hertfordshire.
In confirmation of this, she related the particulars of all the pecuniary transactions
in which they had been connected, without actually naming her authority, but stating
it to be such as might be relied on.
Mrs. Gardiner was surprised and concerned, but as they were now approaching the scene
of her former pleasures, every idea gave way to the charm of recollection, and she was
too much engaged in pointing out to her husband all the interesting spots in its environs
to think of anything else.
Fatigued as she had been by the morning's walk, they had no sooner dined than she set
off again in quest of her former acquaintance, and the evening was spent in the satisfactions
of an intercourse renewed after many years' discontinuance.
The occurrences of the day were too full of interest to leave Elizabeth much attention
for any of these new friends, and she could do nothing but think, and think with wonder,
of Mr. Darcy's civility, and, above all, of his wishing her to be acquainted with his sister.